Taanshi kiyawow, Alison Seaman dishinikashoon.
Regina douscheen, Regina ouschiniya.
Senior Communications Adviser lii College at ESDC.
Ma paaraantii si Marion pi Boucher pi Bremner pi Ross, ooschi Duck Lake, Meadow Lake, St-Louis, pi Qu'Appelle Valley.
What I said in Michif was: "Hello everyone!
My name is Alison Seaman.
I am from Regina, and I live in Regina.
I'm a Senior Communications Advisor at the College at ESDC, and my family names are Marion, Boucher, Bremner and Ross
from Duck Lake, Meadow Lake, St-Louis and Qu'Appelle Valley." I am Red River and South Branch Métis on my paternal grandmother's side
and I've known this since I was in elementary school, but it took me some time to really understand what that meant
and what responsibilities I carry by identifying as a Michif person.
So a little bit about me, my father lost both of his parents by the time he was 16.
During the time while his mother was alive, she was in denial that she was Métis.
She would say she was French and she could pass, so she did.
Her parents are Métis and/or Michif.
We can say that too, they are Michif and she came from a very well known family up North.
I can talk a lot about who they are, but I'll probably save that for another time.
My dad didn't know a lot about this and he didn't have a lot of contact with his Michif family because of the distance
between Meadow Lake primarly and Regina and then later of course, the death of his mother, his parents.
Growing up, my contact with that side of my family was through my Great Uncle Sonny and Aunt Marie,
who used to come from Meadow Lake to Regina every year until I was about, nine or ten to visit us for a bit.
Then, they would carry on to Winnipeg, but during that time, no one would ever talk about Métis things or being Métis.
The only person who really did was Pearl, who was my grandmother's first cousin on my Marion side,
and she had found my parents through their wedding notice in the newspaper and showed up and that's how she became a part of our family.
She was originally from Wakaw, but she lived alone in Regina, and she asked us to call her Grandma Pearl.
Just in the course of knowing her, she would start to share information about the family, particularly the Marion so she would tell my parents mostly.
But she also would give us some pictures and other little heirlooms that she had because she had no one else to pass them on to.
She also was the one who told us that we were Michif.
Later, in elementary school and through high school, I would sometimes mention that I had a Métis grandmother and kids, sometimes even my friends,
would tell me that I wasn't because of how I look and because I didn't grow up in my community.
I really struggled with that.
In my twenties, though, I really started to delve more deeply into the history, and to try to learn more about who I came from, who I am, who my ancestors are.
I spent time reading books, with the family tree and in 2007, I ran across an article where my cousin John Boucher,
we called him John B., spoke of the time he spent, when he was a child, with his grandmother, Marya.
Marya was ni nouhkom, my second great grandmother.
I couldn't believe that there was anyone alive who had known her because it was a long, long time ago.
I looked him up in the phone book and cold called him, but I afraid to leave a message.
He luckily called me back and we got chatting, and he invited my dad and I to come up and visit him.
It just kind of went from there, to the point where when he passed away, my brother gave his eulogy.
I was really, really sad and worried when John B.
passed because I didn't know who else we would be able to connect with.
Over time, my community ties had strengthened.
An example being, it's really kind of escalated in the last couple of years in particular.
A couple of years ago, I connected with another cousin, her name is Cindy Gaudet.
The reason I found her was because of her academic focus on Métis women and kinship, and she was studying in Saint-Louis.
In chatting with her, we discovered we were cousins at first, and then she brought me up to meet more cousins.
I met more Boucher, and then some Bremner cousins, and we spent time discussing the matriarchs in our family.
She's building a matriarch tree right now as part of her research.
Then, she brought me up another time to Saint-Louis to sew a Métis style ribbon skirt, and another cousin taught me how to do that.
As a result of this and some other things, I've been able to see more pictures of my relatives, gotten to know them and feel much more connected.
In very recent times, I've begun finding more of my Marion cousins as well.
These things are really worth it because our kinship relationships are always what have defined us,
and these were severed with colonization and other factors, like in my family, the death of my grandmother.
For me, knowing my community, being connected with them and accepted by them, really means a lot.
The other thing too, that's really important, is reciprocity.
That's something that's important to Métis communities, and like other Indigenous communities.
My hope is to continue to learn, but also give back to them as an Auntie, by preserving our history, language, that I'm just learning,
and really it's important too because there are only about a thousand Michif speakers left.
It's really important, also, to reinvigorate our traditional kinship relationships.
That's been really great in terms of being connected with Cindy and learning about that through her research.
My advice to anyone who's nervous about reconnecting with community is, it can be really hard and really awkward,
but it's worth it because it's helping to preserve our cultures.
I just really want to encourage folks out there, who haven't done that yet, to reach out because we have always, traditionally, done things in community.
We don't do things alone.
I just want to really impress upon folks that, as awkward and challenging as it might feel, send that email, cold call that relative.
It's time! Kihchi-Marsii. Thank you very much!